Login Help		    Mon Sep 18 16:00:01 EDT 2000

In order to participate in a contest, you need to log
into your contest account.

Normally we make all contestants run on the same fast
computer.  This means that all contestants are subject
to the same load.

Rules for Formal Contests:
----- --- ------ --------

The contest managers will log in for you.  You may or
may not be given an X-Terminal equivalent.  If you are,
you can make more windows using xcsh: see below.  If
not, you must ask the contest managers to make more
windows for you.  You will NOT be given any password.

For formal contests you are assigned a location and
and account name.  Please type `who am i' to be sure
you have the right account.

At the end of the contest you should email your code
to your accounts in the world outside so you have
a record of what you did.  Note that email coming
into the contest computer is controlled, but email
out is not.
    

Rules for Informal Contests:
----- --- -------- --------

You will be given a sheet of paper with a contest
account name and a password.  You can log in to that
account from anywhere (e.g., if there are not enough
terminals in one place you can go to any other place).

You must use the secure shell (ssh) to log into the
contest computers.  You may use an X-Terminal equivalent
(X-server) in combination with ssh.  If you use an
X-Terminal equivalent, you can make new windows easily
with xcsh: see below.

Your contest account will normally remain for 24 hours
after the contest, and you should collect your code
from that account within that time period.  You can
email code out from the account (but email into the
contest computer is controlled).


Special Rules for Maxwell-Dworkin Public PCs
--------------------------------------------

On these computers X-window and ssh do not work toge-
ther.  You can make them work if you want to by
using X-windows to connect to some account you have
on deas or fas.  Then you can ssh to the contest
account from there, and use the xcsh command below
to build more windows easily.

Alternatively you can use ttssh to make terminal
windows for the contest account directly.  The only
disadvantage of this is it takes more clicks to make
a new window (and you need the password for the
contest account).


Creating Windows with Xcsh
--------------------------

To create a new window when you are running with an X
terminal, you may use the command:

    xcsh    Start a new X terminal window running csh.

            The new window tends to form directly over
	    the top the leftmost existing window, so one
	    of these windows has to be moved.

You can also try:

    xcsh 1   Ditto but with different fonts.
    xcsh 2   Try these out if you do not like the
    xcsh 3   normal font.
    xcsh 4
