Untimed Contest Help	    Wed Apr 19 12:14:31 EDT 2006


Untimed contests are an alternative to timed programming
contests.  One common way of scoring untimed contests is
feedback scoring, in which contestants may get feedback
from an autojudge giving the judge's input or output for
failed test cases, and the number and kinds of feedback
determine a ranking score for each problem a contestant
eventually correctly solves.

Because these contests are untimed, they generally have
a web page containing the problem descriptions.  Contes-
tants may be given account names and passwords, or may
be allowed to work on their own computers and simply
email submissions to the autojudge.


Rules for Untimed Contests:
----- --- ------- --------

If you are given a contest account name and a password,
you can log into your contest account from anywhere.
You must use the secure shell (ssh) to log into the
contest computers.  You may use an X-Terminal equivalent
(X-server) in combination with ssh.  If you use an
X-Terminal equivalent, you can make new windows easily
with xcsh: see `help xterminals'.

If you are not given a contest account name and pass-
word, you will be given an email address to which you
can send submissions.

TBD

You may be able to use the print commands in an informal
contest, if you are located in the same building as the
printer.  The command `printer' will tell you the name
of your printer, if one exists.  If you have no printer,
or want to change your printer, you can set up your
account to use the printer of your choice or to e-mail
postscript files of printouts to the e-mail address of
your choice.  See `help print'.

The `scoreboard' and `help' commands work for an
informal contest.

If you are simulating a formal contest precisely, you
will not be allowed to use the alternative make commands
that `in-submit' or `inout-submit'.  However `solution-
submit' may work.

Your contest account will normally remain for some
longish period of time after the contest so you can
log in and email out your solutions, in order to save
them.




File:		informal_contest
Author:		Bob Walton <walton@deas.harvard.edu>
Date:		See top of file.

The authors have placed this file in the public domain;
they make no warranty and accept no liability for this
file.

RCS Info (may not be true date or author):

    $Author: hc3 $
    $Date: 2006/04/19 16:22:09 $
    $RCSfile: untimed_contest,v $
    $Revision: 1.1 $
