Software
--------

Make hpcm_get do something with .ISF files.

Add recipient filter to receivemail.

Eliminate need for auxiliary judges to use ~/.hpcm_contest.
Add an optional contest directory parameter to hpcm_sendmail.
Make an hpcm_sendmail in judge/bin that locates the judging
contest/bin directory and uses the contestant hpcm_senmail
with this directory parameter.

A judging document should be written describing how
to set up the judging file, how to do judging, how
to handle some system overflow problems.

A scoreboard_map needs to be implemented.

Add `legal' emails for Bob Walton and Dan Ellard.

A scoresort program needs to be written that will sort
all blocks between blank lines, where a block is a
sequence of lines beginning with a line that begins with
a non-whitespace character.  This can be applied to the
crypto problem in its multiple solution form.

Write a print_index_files program to print an index and all
files listed in it.

Write hpcm_help for email/sh.

Provide a way for the judge to easily comment on the code
of a submission, for the case when HPCM is being used
in a course for problem submissions.

Provide a way for a multifile submission, for the case when
HPCM is being used in a course for problem submissions.

Done but Not Sufficiently Tested
--------------------------------

It should in general be possible to filter the .out,
.in, and .test files through a program provided by the judge.
For example, such a program could test whether .out contained
a legal solution as optimal as the .test solution.

Problems
--------

Problems with both .html and .txt versions need to be reviewed
to see if the input/output formats of the two versions are compatible.

The public/motion problem needs work.  Its .out and .test
do not match (at least on some machines).   It may not
have a stable output.

Get permission from Zong Da Chen to put anagrams in public domain,
and double check with him that solution was written by Bob Walton
and not him.

Settle authorship and public/private status of: bignum.
