Help from Polonius	    Thu Oct  6 09:35:00 EDT 2005


Read the Demonstration Problems
---- --- ------------- --------

Every contest has rules for how to write your solution
programs; e.g., rules for submitting files, rules for
doing input and output, etc.  The best way to BE SURE
you are following these rules is to read a demonstration
problem solution in the language you are using, and
mimic that solution when you do input/output, submit
your files, etc.


Input/Output Difficulties
-------------------------

A surprising number of solutions have simple bugs in
input or output.  You need to master these with a bit
of practice.  For example, be sure you can detect
the end of file and not go into an infinite loop when
it happens. 


Completeness
------------

Often solutions are correct except that their author
ignored one smallish instruction in the problem state-
ment.   You need to test that your solution meets EVERY
stipulation in the problem statement.  There is no
partial credit in a contest like this.


In a Formal Contest Do the Easiest Problems First
-------------------------------------------------

Take great care to do easiest problems first.  Your
primary score is the number of completely correct prob-
lems you have done.  Your secondary score, used in the
event of a primary score tie, is the sum of the number
of seconds you took for each problem, where the seconds
taken for a problem is computed by subtracting the start
time of the contest from the submit time of your first
correct solution of the problem.  The secondary score is
lowest best (the primary score is highest best).  In
effect, if you do N problems, the time you take on the
first problem counts N times, the time on the second N-1
times, etc.  So you want the problems you solve first to
be the ones that take you the least amount of time.  You
also want to do easiest problems first so you will solve
more problems, and your primary score will be higher.

Be sure you can handle the formatting issues of a prob-
lem before you attempt it.


Formal Contest Goals
--------------------

You should try hard to complete half the problems.  
Often completing a bit more than half the problems is
sufficient to be one of the several contest `winners'
(i.e. to go on to the next round).

Contestants who are completely new to this kind of all-
or-nothing problem scoring usually find it difficult to
get even one problem correct during a timed contest.
Such contestants should have as their goal to get just
one problem during the contest.



File:		advice
Author:		Bob Walton <walton@deas.harvard.edu>
Date:		See top of file.

The authors have placed this file in the public domain;
they make no warranty and accept no liability for this
file.

RCS Info (may not be true date or author):

    $Author: hc3 $
    $Date: 2005/10/06 13:33:00 $
    $RCSfile: advice,v $
    $Revision: 1.8 $
