Practice Problems Help	    Tue Aug  8 05:51:55 EDT 2017


Practice Problems
-------- --------

Some contests have practice problems in addition to
regular contest problems.  Practice problems are just
like regular contest problems except:

(1) Practice problems do NOT count in scoring the
    contest and do NOT show up on the contest
    scoreboard.

(2) Practice problems may be done DURING OR BEFORE the
    contest.

(3) Contest management may help teams with ANY aspect of
    a practice problem, including details of algorithm
    selection, design, and coding.

The practice problem set may be printed from the contest
web page.  If you might like to work practice problems
during a contest, you should bring sufficient printouts
of the problems to the contest.

If a contest has practice problems the following
commands can be used:

    practice index
        Displays an index of the practice problems.

    practice print
        Prints the practice problem set.  Please do not
	do this unless you are sure you need to, in
	order to avoid overloading the printer.  Also
	tell contest management you are printing the
	practice problems, as these printouts may not
	indicate who is printing them.

    practice scoreboard
        Displays a scoreboard containing just the
	practice problems, in the same way that the
	`scoreboard' command outputs the normal
	contest scoreboard.

Practice problems are solved and submitted in the same
way that normal problems are solved and submitted, and
their scores are returned in e-mail in the same way as
the scores of normal problems are returned.  The
`hpcm_get' command gets practice problems whenever it
is executed.  A practice problem named `ppp' is gotten
to the directory named `~/practice/ppp'.

If the input and output of the first failed test case is
being returned by the autojudge for the easiest normal
problems, this will also be done for practice problems.


File:		practice
Author:		Bob Walton <walton@seas.harvard.edu>
Date:		See top of file.

The authors have placed this file in the public domain;
they make no warranty and accept no liability for this
file.
