Scoreboard Help		    Tue Mar  5 10:11:48 EST 2013

The scores of individual problems are described in the
`scores' help file.  This file describes how individual
problem scores are put together into a scoreboard.


The Scoreboard
--------------

If you do not have a contest account provided by the
contest judges, you will typically have been given a web
URL at which a one page contest scoreboard is displayed.

But in a contest account provided by the contest judges
the scoreboard is best displayed by allocating a
separate window to show the scoreboard and in that
window running the command:

    scoreboard

	This command will show the contest scoreboard
	refreshing every 30 seconds.  The command is
	best executed in its own window.  To terminate
	type control-C.
	
	The scoreboard may have several pages, and in
	such a case this command cycles through all the
	pages, going to the next page every 30 seconds.

    scoreboard N

	This command just displays the N'th scoreboard
	page, refreshing every 30 seconds.

    scoreboard CONTEST-NAME
    scoreboard CONTEST-NAME N

        Sometimes one account can be used to enter many
	different contests.  In this case you have to
	identify which contest you want to see the
	scoreboard of.  Usually the `scoreboard' command
	by itself will list all the possible contests.


The part of a scoreboard that shows team scores may be
frozen during the last hour of a formal contest.  This
means the scoreboard only shows results as of the time
when it was frozen, which is one hour before the contest
ends.  This is done to create suspense, so people will
come to the post-contest meeting at which the final con-
test results will be announced.


Ranking Submitters
------- ----------

The scoreboard gives for each problem and submitter in-
formation about the submissions made by the submitter
for the problem.  For each submitter the scoreboard
typically gives the total number of problems correctly
solved by the submitter, and a ranking score that ranks
submitters who have the same number of solved problems.

A submitter (contest account) may be a team or an in-
dividual, depending on the type of contest.  Here we use
`submitter' to mean either `a team' or `an individual'.

Some contests are completely unscored.  For these the
submitters are listed in alphabetical order, and for
each problem and submitter an indication is given of
whether the submitter has solved the problem, and if
so, the date the problem was solved.

On the other hand, if the contest is being scored, sub-
mitters with more correctly solved problems appear
earlier in the scoreboard.

When a contest is being scored, there may be a way of
ranking submitters who have the same number of solved
problems.  If there is no ranking for a scored contest,
submitters are listed by alphabetical order within the
group of submitters all of which have the same number of
solved problems.

There are two different methods of ranking that can be
used.  The classical way, used in all limited duration
contests, is to measure the time required to solved each
problem.  This is called `timed' ranking.  The other
way, usable in untimed contests, is to use the kinds of
feedback provided for incorrect submissions.  Depending
upon the submission type, either the judge's input or
both the judge's input and output for the first failed
test case can be provided for a submission.  This is
called `feedback' ranking.

For either kind of ranking, each solution is assigned a
numerical score, these scores are either added or aver-
aged to produce a score for each submitter, and problems
a submitter never solves do not count in any way toward
scoring or ranking submitters.

Below we discuss in separate sections timed, feedback,
and unranked contests, so you may read just the appro-
priate section.  However the following is common to
all kinds of contest.

A scoreboard has an entry for each submitter and each
problem.

If there are no submissions for a problem by a submit-
ter, `......' appears in the scoreboard for the submit-
ter and problem.  This also appears if there are no
correct submissions and incorrect submissions are NOT
being reported.  But if incorrect submissions are being
reported and there are some for a problem not yet cor-
rectly submitted by a submitter, then `..../N' appears,
where N is the number of incorrect submissions by the
submitter for the problem.

For each submitter in a ranked contest the number of
solutions N and ranking score RRR of the submitter are
reported in the format `N/RRR'.  For timed contests
higher RRR is worse, but for feedback contests higher
RRR is better.  For scored but unranked contests, only
N is reported, and there is no `/RRR'.

In some contests, problems are scored first by an auto-
judge, and then if they are not completely correct, the
score is reviewed by a human judge.  If you see a `*'
prefixed or suffixed to any item of scoreboard informa-
tion, this means that one or more submissions used to
compute the item have been scored incorrect by the auto-
judge, but are still awaiting review by the human judge.

Formal Timed Contests
------ ----- --------

A formal contest is a contest of limited duration in
which the problem descriptions are passed out at the
start of the contest.  Each solved problem is given a
score that is the difference between the time the
correct solution was submitted and the start time of
the contest.

In a formal contest a submitter's ranking score is the
sum (NOT the average) of all the solution scores for
the solutions submitted by the submitter.  Lower time
scores are better, higher time scores are worse.  Also,
if you think of problems as being solved consecutively,
and a submitter solves, say, three problems, the first
in time T1, the second in time T2, and the third in time
T3, then the submitter's ranking score is 3*T1 + 2*T2 +
T3, so it pays to solve the easiest problems first.

Solution times are computed in seconds.  Some contests
apply a penalty of typically 20 minutes (1200 seconds)
for each incorrect submission of a problem made before
the first correct submission of the problem.

Solution times may be represented on the scoreboard as
`M:SSsN', with decimal numbers M, SS, and N, meaning
that the solution time is M minutes and SS seconds, and
there were N submissions, including N-1 incorrect sub-
missions, before the first correct submission.  The `s'
means the time SS is in seconds.  N may be omitted if
incorrect submissions are not being reported on the
scoreboard.

`H:MMmN' instead means the time is H hours and MM min-
utes, rounded down to the nearest minute.  `D:HHhN'
instead means the time is D days and HH hours, rounded
down to the nearest hour.  `DdN' means the time is D
days, rounded down to the nearest day.  The choice of
time unit, s, m, h, or d, is made to give the elapsed
time to the greatest accuracy within 6 display charac-
ters, including the unit character.  However the actual
solution time used for computing a submitter's ranking
score as described above is always in seconds.

Informal Timed Contests
-------- ----- --------

Informal contests derive timed scores without having a
single contest start time or giving out paper problem
descriptions.  In an informal contest a submitter gets a
problem named pppp by executing

	hpcm_get problems/pppp

This obtains a description of the problem as a file in
the submitter's problems/pppp directory.

In general, the problem score for a timed contest for a
submitter is the difference between the time the submit-
ter submits a correct solution and the start time of the
problem.  There are two ways of scoring informal con-
tests, depending on how problem start times are assign-
ed.

If the problem start times for a particular submitter
are ALL the first time the submitter gets ANY problem in
the contest, this time acts as the start time of the
contest for the particular submitter, and the ranking
score is the same as that of the formal contest above.
In this case, an informal contest is just like a formal
contest except each submitter (each team) can start at a
different time.

If a start time for a particular problem and submitter
is the time the submitter hpcm_get's the problem, the
ranking score is the AVERAGE of the problem scores,
which is just the average time to solve any problem the
submitter has solved.  Again lower scores are better,
higher scores are worse.  In contests of this kind there
is often a maximum problem score, i.e. a maximum problem
solution time, so that any problem whose solution takes
longer than this maximum is counted as if it took just
this maximum amount of time to solve.

Feedback Contests
-------- --------

When a scored contest is not of limited duration and
problems are not being timed, three different kinds of
submission may be allowed, and different penalties are
assigned for each kind of submission when that submis-
sion is incorrect.

The methods for making different kinds of submissions
are as follows:

  Contest Provided	Personal Account;
  Account Command:	Send email with:

  make submit		Subject: submit ppp.ext
  make in-submit	Subject: submit ppp.ext in
  make inout-submit	Subject: submit ppp.ext inout
  make solution-submit  Subject: submit ppp.ext solution

You use the `make' commands in an account provided to
you by the contest managers, and you send email with the
given `Subject:' fields from your own personal account
that is not provided by the contest.  You can also use
the `make' commands in a personal account if you use the
email UNIX tools: see the email_unix_tools help file.

In what follows we refer to the different types of sub-
mission as `submit', `in-submit', `inout-submit', and
`solution-submit'.

The penalties typically assigned for different submis-
sion types in feedback scoring are:

	submit			10%
	in-submit		20%
	inout-submit		30%

`Submit' returns just the submission score.  `In-submit'
also returns the judge's input for the first test case
that was incorrect, when this is practical.  `Inout-
submit' returns both judge's input and judge's output
for this test case.

The score for each solution starts at 100.00, and is
multiplied by 90% for each incorrect `submit', 80% for
each incorrect `in-submit', and 70% for each incorrect
`inout-submit'.  Thus each penalty is applied to the re-
maining score for a problem.  Note that only incorrect
submissions before the first correct submission count.

A submitter's ranking score is the average (NOT the sum)
of the solution scores for all problems solved by the
submitter.

`Solution-submit' does not affect scoring.  It returns
the judge's solution if the score is `Completely
Correct'.  After receiving a `Completely Correct' score
for some other type of submission, you may resubmit
using `solution-submit' to get the judge's solution
without affecting your problem score.

If incorrect submissions are being reported, then for
each solution the solution score and the number of
incorrect submissions are both reported using the format
`IIiOOoXX:SS'.  Here the upper case letter pairs denote
numbers and the lower case letters `i' and `o' appear
literally on the scoreboard.  II is the number of 
in-submit' incorrect submissions, OO the number of
`inout-submit' incorrect submissions, XX the number of
`submit' incorrect submissions, and SS is the solution
score rounded to the nearest integer.  If there are no
incorrect submissions, just `100' is reported instead.

If incorrect submissions are NOT are being reported,
then only SS is reported.

Although SS is rounded to the nearest integer, in compu-
ting the ranking score of a submitter, the solution
score to many decimal places is used.


Unranked Contests
-------- --------

If a contest is unranked, there are no ranking scores,
and the entry for a problem solution is just the date of
the solution, followed by `/N' if N is the total number
of submissions up to and including the first correct
submission, provided that incorrect submissions are
being reported.

The scoreboard for an unranked contest may or may not
report the number of correct submissions each submitter
has.  If it does, the submitters are sorted first by
their numbers of correct submissions, and then alphabe-
tically by submitter name, and the scoring is called
`unranked scoring'.  Otherwise submitters are all just
sorted alphabetically, without reporting the number of
correct submissions for each submitter, and the contest
is said to be `unscored'.



File:		scoreboard
Author:		Bob Walton <walton@seas.harvard.edu>
Date:		See top of file.

The authors have placed this file in the public domain;
they make no warranty and accept no liability for this
file.

RCS Info (may not be true date or author):

    $Author: walton $
    $Date: 2013/03/05 16:43:26 $
    $RCSfile: scoreboard,v $
    $Revision: 1.21 $
