Terminals Help	            Tue Mar  5 08:07:25 EST 2013

This file is for those who are using an account provided
by the contest managers.  The issues are how to connect
to the account and how to create new windows.

Table of Contents:

    Connecting From Linux or a MAC
    Creating New Windows with X-Windows and Xsh
    Destroying a Window

    [MORE STUFF WILL BE INCLUDED LATER]


Connecting From Linux or a MAC
---------- ---- ----- -- - ---

Open a terminal window and use:

	ssh -X someaccount@somecomputer

This will given you a terminal emulator connected to
your account, plus X-windows support.



Creating New Windows with X-Windows and Xsh
-------- --- ------- ---- --------- --- ---

Here we assume you are using a terminal emulator with
X-windows support.  Then to create a new window you may
use the command:

    xsh     Start a new X terminal window running your
    	    current shell.

            The new window tends to form directly over
	    the top of the leftmost existing window, so
	    one of these windows has to be moved.

If gnome-terminal is available, xsh uses it.  Otherwise
is uses xterm.  It can be forced to use xterm by giving
it the `-xterm' option, as in `xsh -xterm'.

If gnome-terminal is used a toolbar will appear at the
top of the window and this can be used to change the
window size and create new windows.  You can change the
characteristics of the current and future windows by
editing the current profile (xsh always uses the
`Default' profile).  Also `control +' will increase the
window size, `control -' will decrease it, `control N'
will create a new window, `control T' will create a new
`tab' in the current window.  When the window size
changes, the font size changes correspondingly.

If xterm is used, an additional argument may be given
to xsh which is the font point size.  A `b' may be
suffixed to this to force bold font.  So

	xsh -xterm 25b

will use xterm with 25 point bold font.

To get more complete documentation of xsh type the
command `xsh -doc'.


Destroying a Window
---------- - ------

To destroy a window just type the command `exit', or if
that does not work, `logout'.

BUT BE CAREFUL not to destroy your original (root)
window as doing that may destroy all other windows and
force you to log in again, or in an ACM Contest, to call
the contest manager to log you back in.


File:		terminals
Author:		Bob Walton <walton@seas.harvard.edu>
Date:		See top of file.

The authors have placed this file in the public domain;
they make no warranty and accept no liability for this
file.
