Email Contest Help	    Sun Oct 29 05:10:33 EST 2000

In order to participate in an email contest, you need an
account on a machine of your own in which to solve prob-
lems.  This account should support the programming lang-
uages you want to use, and should support email.  This
account will communicate with the contest autojudge
through email.

If your account is on a machine that supports the Bourne
shell (sh), as all UNIX machines do, HPCM provides a set
of tool programs to make participating in an email con-
test easier.  See the file `help/unix_email_tools'.

Contest Definition
------- ----------

You will be given an email address to use in communica-
ting with the autojudge.  This email address typically
has the form `fee<fie@fo.fum>' where `fee' is a password
that is not to be revealed to the public.  You will
also typically be given a web URL of the form

	www.fiddle/~diddle/private/fee

where fee is the same password as in the email address,
and the URL is not to be put in a public web page.  The
`private' directory here is not readable by the public,
so to access the web page a person has to know the
password.  The scoreboard will be posted on the web
page, along with information about how to participate in
the contest.


Getting Started
------- -------

To get started, send



Rules for Informal Contests:
----- --- -------- --------

You will be given a sheet of paper with a contest
account name and a password.  You can log in to that
account from anywhere (e.g., if there are not enough
terminals in one place you can go to any other place).

You must use the secure shell (ssh) to log into the
contest computers.  You may use an X-Terminal equivalent
(X-server) in combination with ssh.  If you use an
X-Terminal equivalent, you can make new windows easily
with xcsh: see below.

Your contest account will normally remain for 24 hours
after the contest, and you should collect your code
from that account within that time period.  You can
email code out from the account (but email into the
contest computer is controlled).


Special Rules for Maxwell-Dworkin Public PCs
--------------------------------------------

On these computers X-window and ssh do not work toge-
ther.  You can make them work if you want to by
using X-windows to connect to some account you have
on deas or fas.  Then you can ssh to the contest
account from there, and use the xcsh command below
to build more windows easily.

Alternatively you can use ttssh to make terminal
windows for the contest account directly.  The only
disadvantage of this is it takes more clicks to make
a new window (and you need the password for the
contest account).


Creating Windows with Xcsh
--------------------------

To create a new window when you are running with an X
terminal, you may use the command:

    xcsh    Start a new X terminal window running csh.

            The new window tends to form directly over
	    the top the leftmost existing window, so one
	    of these windows has to be moved.

You can also try:

    xcsh 1   Ditto but with different fonts.
    xcsh 2   Try these out if you do not like the
    xcsh 3   normal font.
    xcsh 4

If you are not running with an X terminal emulator, you
cannot use these commands.
